Update ControllerModifyVolume Status API (#4298)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-storage/3751-volume-attributes-class/README.md

  ...
}

// Add the PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolume condition to existing PersistentVolumeClaimConditionType
// Condition is used to document the last error controller sees
const (
  ...
  // PersistentVolumeClaimVolumeAttriburesModifyError - a user trigger modify volume of pvc has error

>   PersistentVolumeClaimVolumeAttriburesModifyError PersistentVolumeClaimConditionType = "VolumeAttriburesModifyError"

Reviewer: We also want to add the "VolumeAttributesModifying" condition based on this discussion with @gnufied https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4298#discussion_r1369227401

Author: Why do we need a modifying? We cannot just say "Err but we are retrying" in the messaging?

Reviewer 2: How does an operator that is possibly monitoring the pvc knows volume is being modified or not? By regexp. for message on the condition? Seems fragile.

  ...
)

// PersistentVolumeClaimStatus represents the status of PV claim
type PersistentVolumeClaimStatus struct {
  ...
  // ModifyVolumeStatus represents the status object of ControllerModifyVolume operation

>   ModifyVolumeStatus ModifyVolumeStatus

Reviewer: New fields in existing stucts:
https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#optional-vs-required

  ...
}

// ModifyVolumeStatus represents the status object of ControllerModifyVolume operation
type ModifyVolumeStatus struct {
  // CurrentVolumeAttributesClassName is the current name of the VolumeAttributesClass the PVC is using
  CurrentVolumeAttributesClassName string
  // TargetVolumeAttributesClassName is the name of the VolumeAttributesClass the PVC currently being reconciled
  TargetVolumeAttributesClassName string
  // Status is the status of the ControllerModifyVolume operation

>   Status *PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus

Reviewer 3: @sunnylovestiramisu @msau42

Why use a pointer type? Do we want to distinguish a `nil` value and a zero value? If so, why? If not, why not use a non-pointer type?

Author: History of this being a pointer: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3780/files#r1230300561

Author: Hmm actually this should not be a pointer.

}

// +enum
// New statuses can be added in the future. Consumers should check for unknown statuses and fail appropriately
type PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus string

const (
  // Pending indicates that the PersistentVolumeClaim cannot be modified due to requirements not being met, such as 

>   // the PersistentVolumeClaim being in an invalid state or the specified VolumeAttributesClass is existing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  // the PersistentVolumeClaim being in an invalid state or the specified VolumeAttributesClass doesn't exist.
```

Author: Oh actually "the VolumeAttributesClass doesn't exist should be moved to pending state instead".

  ...
}

// Add the PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolume condition to existing PersistentVolumeClaimConditionType
// Condition is used to document the last error controller sees
const (
  ...
  // Applying the target VolumeAttributesClass encountered an error
  PersistentVolumeClaimVolumeModifyVolumeError PersistentVolumeClaimConditionType = "ModifyVolumeError"
  // Volume is being modified
  PersistentVolumeClaimVolumeModifyingVolume PersistentVolumeClaimConditionType = "ModifyingVolume"
  ...
)

// PersistentVolumeClaimStatus represents the status of PV claim
type PersistentVolumeClaimStatus struct {
  ...
  // CurrentVolumeAttributesClassName is the current name of the VolumeAttributesClass the PVC is using
  CurrentVolumeAttributesClassName *string
  // ModifyVolumeStatus represents the status object of ControllerModifyVolume operation
  ModifyVolumeStatus *ModifyVolumeStatus
  ...
}

> // ModifyVolumeStatus represents the status object of ControllerModifyVolume operation

Reviewer 3: If we don't want to distinct the ControllerModifyVolume and XXXModifyVolume, Is it possible to drop the Controller prefix in the ModifyVolumeStatus description?

Author: It is already dropped in the newest revision?

Reviewer 3: the `ControllerModifyVolume ` word still exists in L197 and L201

  ...
}

// Add the PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolume condition to existing PersistentVolumeClaimConditionType
// Condition is used to document the last error controller sees
const (
  ...
  // PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolume - a user trigger modify volume of pvc has been started

>   PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolume PersistentVolumeClaimConditionType = "ModifyVolume"

Reviewer 3: I'm having trouble understanding this name of the new condition type. Is this saying that all the moditication of the volume which includes the reszie operation or just for changing volume attributes? If it's the latter, I think we should rename it to something like `ModifyVolumeAttributes`.

Author: I do not have a strong opinion of the naming, I was following the previous naming by using actions instead of a noun. This condition is used to document the last error the controller sees.

Author: Discussed in the sig-storage meeting, we will name it "VolumeAttriburesModifyError"

Reviewer 2: If we are not going to change status when we retry `ModifyVolume` after failing (and status is set to `Infeasible`), then we need to somehow communicate to the user that, we are again retrying `ModifyVolume` (albeit slowly), so we will I think need a condition for that too. cc @msau42

Reviewer: When do you propose we set a ModifyVolume condition to true and false? From [api-conventions](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#typical-status-properties), it says:
```
For state transitions which take a long period of time (e.g. more than 1 minute), it is reasonable to treat the transition itself as an observed state. In these cases, the Condition (such as "Resizing") itself should not be transient, and should instead be signalled using the True/False/Unknown pattern. This allows other observers to determine the last update from the controller, whether successful or failed. In cases where the state transition is unable to complete and continued reconciliation is not feasible, the Reason and Message should be used to indicate that the transition failed.
```

I interpret the last sentence to mean that if we still intend to retry, the status should still be True.

So the main benefits I see of having the condition is:
1) that the timestamp can be updated every time we retry an operation.
2) we could potentially return false for some preconditions like VAC doesn't exist or is invalid, PVC not bound, etc.

  ...
)

// PersistentVolumeClaimStatus represents the status of PV claim
type PersistentVolumeClaimStatus struct {
  ...
  // ModifyVolumeStatus represents the status object of ControllerModifyVolume operation
  ModifyVolumeStatus ModifyVolumeStatus
  ...
}

// ModifyVolumeStatus represents the status object of ControllerModifyVolume operation
type ModifyVolumeStatus struct {
  // ActualVolumeAttributesClassName is the actual name of the VolumeAttributesClass the PVC is using
  ActualVolumeAttributesClassName string

>   // TargetVolumeAttributesClassName is the target name of the VolumeAttributesClass the PVC is using
>   TargetVolumeAttributesClassName string

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  // TargetVolumeAttributesClassName is the target name of the VolumeAttributesClass the PVC wants to use
  TargetVolumeAttributesClassName string
```

Author: Added separately.

  // Status is the status of the ControllerModifyVolume operation
  Status *PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus
}

// +enum
// When a controller receives persistentvolume claim update with PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus for a resource
// that it does not recognizes, then it should ignore that update and let other controllers

> // handle it.

Reviewer 3: In which case the controller cannot recognize the status value?

type PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus string

const (

>   // State set when modify volume controller wants to modify the volume in control-plane

Reviewer 3: What is the `modify volume controller`? pv controller in kube-controller-manager or CSI driver controller?

Author: it is the resize controller actually, we are putting this modify volume controller logic in the external-resizer.

  // but the VolumeAttributesClass does not exist.

>   PersistentVolumeClaimControllerModifyVolumePending PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus = "ControllerModifyVolumePending"

Author: We are not going to but will we ever consider supporting node operations?

  // State set when modify volume controller starts modifying the volume in control-plane

>   // When the request has been rejected as invalid by the CSI driver. To resolve this error,

Reviewer 3: and here.

Author: Here what?

// PersistentVolumeClaimStatus represents the status of PV claim
type PersistentVolumeClaimStatus struct {
  ...
  ModifyVolumeStatus ModifyVolumeStatus
  ...
}

type ModifyVolumeStatus struct {
  ActualVolumeAttributesClassName string
  TargetVolumeAttributesClassName string
  Status *PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus
}

// +enum
type PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus string

const (
  // When modify volume is complete, the empty string is set by modify volume controller.
  PersistentVolumeClaimNoModifyVolumeInSucceeded PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus = ""
  // State set when modify volume controller starts modifying the volume in control-plane
  // When the request has been rejected as invalid by the CSI driver. To resolve this error,
  // the PersistentVolumeClaim needs to specify a valid VolumeAttributesClass.
  PersistentVolumeClaimControllerModifyVolumeInProgress PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus = "ControllerModifyVolumeInProgress"
  // State set when modify volume has failed in modify volume controller with a terminal error.

>   PersistentVolumeClaimControllerModifyVolumeInfeasible PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus = "ControllerModifyVolumeInfeasible"

Reviewer 3: How to reconginze whether an error is a retryable error or not? We need to clairfy it first. i.e. timeout error ?

>   PersistentVolumeClaimControllerModifyVolumeInfeasible PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus = "ControllerModifyVolumeInfeasible"

Author: The description is in the paragraph above, this is duplicating. Right now a invalid argument error is an infeasible error. If you have more in mind please advice.

>   PersistentVolumeClaimControllerModifyVolumeInfeasible PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus = "ControllerModifyVolumeInfeasible"

Reviewer 2: So we don't need `Failed` anymore? What about other errors such as - may be volume has entered a state where it can't be modified right now, but can be modified like 10 minutes later (like a quota on request/hour or something for same volume).

>   PersistentVolumeClaimControllerModifyVolumeInfeasible PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus = "ControllerModifyVolumeInfeasible"

Author: Discussed today at the CSI meeting. We will have Pending/InProgress/Infeasible/""(indicates success)

  ...
  // The VolumeAttributesClassName string cannot be empty

>   VolumeAttributesClassName string

Reviewer: remove this field since it is now moved to actualclassname

  ModifyVolumeStatus ModifyVolumeStatus
  ...
}

type ModifyVolumeStatus struct {

>   ActualClassName string

Reviewer: replace Class with VolumeAttributesClass

>   ActualClassName string

Reviewer: I am wondering whether we should actually make this field an object reference instead of just a name.

I am thinking of the scenario where someone may delete and recreate the VAC with the same name but different content. But actually, if we really want to keep track of the attributes are, we may need to keep track of it in the PV object. @jsafrane @gnufied wdyt?

Author: Is uuid enough to distinguish instead of doing comparision of the whole VAC object?

  TargetClassName string
  Status *PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus
}

// +enum
type PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus string

const (
  // When modify volume is complete, the empty string is set by modify volume controller.

>   PersistentVolumeClaimNoModifyVolumeInSucceeded PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus = ""

Reviewer: It's either succeeded or not started. I don't know if we need a const for this.

  // State set when modify volume controller starts modifying the volume in control-plane
  // Non terminal errors should also keep this status without modification
  PersistentVolumeClaimControllerModifyVolumeInProgress PersistentVolumeClaimModifyVolumeStatus = "ControllerModifyVolumeInProgress"

>   // State set when modify volume has failed in modify volume controller with a terminal error.

Reviewer: A better description may be "when the request has been rejected as invalid by the CSI driver. To resolve this error, the PersistentVolumeClaim needs to specify a valid VolumeAttributesClass."

// ControllerServer is the server API for Controller service.
type ControllerServer interface {
    ...
    rpc ControllerModifyVolume (ControllerModifyVolumeRequest)
        returns (ControllerModifyVolumeResponse) {
            option (alpha_method) = true;
        }
    ...
}

message ControllerModifyVolumeRequest {
  // Contains identity information for the existing volume.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string volume_id = 1;

  // Secrets required by plugin to complete modify volume request.
  // This field is OPTIONAL. Refer to the `Secrets Requirements`
  // section on how to use this field.
  map<string, string> secrets = 2 [(csi_secret) = true];

  // Plugin specific volume attributes to mutate, passed in as 
  // opaque key-value pairs. 
  // This field is REQUIRED. The Plugin is responsible for
  // parsing and validating these parameters. COs will treat these
  // as opaque. The CO SHOULD specify the intended values of all mutable
  // parameters it intends to modify. SPs MUST NOT modify volumes based
  // on the absence of keys, only keys that are specified should result
  // in modifications to the volume.

>   map<string, string> mutable_parameters = 3;

Reviewer 3: Is the parameters field of the VAC optional? If the mutable_parameters is required, the field in the VAC definition may be required as well and at least contains one key.

from chatgpt:

<img width="731" alt="企业微信截图_31b09e72-e351-4243-b8c3-dcdd7e993fb8" src="https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/assets/28390961/9a8bf977-f2b9-4363-97a4-52de3de5ecea">

Reviewer 3: I’m curious why the required and optional keyword is not used in fields in the csi proto file.

Author: We can add it, but that is the CSI spec update. The CSI Spec release has been cut already. We can revisit at next CSI meeting.

Author: Actually in the CSI spec, there are some extra paragraph I just did not copy pasted here because it is stand alone:

```
// Plugin specific creation-time parameters passed in as opaque 
  // key-value pairs. These mutable_parameteres MAY also be
  // changed during the lifetime of the volume via a subsequent
  // `ControllerModifyVolume` RPC. This field is OPTIONAL.
  // The Plugin is responsible for parsing and validating these
  // parameters. COs will treat these as opaque.
```

Please refer to the CSI spec for accuracy.

Author: And also in CSI spec:

```
message ControllerModifyVolumeRequest {
  option (alpha_message) = true;

  // Contains identity information for the existing volume.
  // This field is REQUIRED.
  string volume_id = 1;

  // Secrets required by plugin to complete modify volume request.
  // This field is OPTIONAL. Refer to the `Secrets Requirements`
  // section on how to use this field.
  map<string, string> secrets = 2 [(csi_secret) = true];

  // Plugin specific volume attributes to mutate, passed in as 
  // opaque key-value pairs. 
  // This field is REQUIRED. The Plugin is responsible for
  // parsing and validating these parameters. COs will treat these
  // as opaque. The CO SHOULD specify the intended values of all mutable
  // parameters it intends to modify. SPs MUST NOT modify volumes based
  // on the absence of keys, only keys that are specified should result
  // in modifications to the volume.
  map<string, string> mutable_parameters = 3;
}

```

Reviewer: So in CreateVolume it is optional, but in ModifyVolume it is required. I think that makes sense.

From a k8s POV, if a user doesn't specify any vacName in the PVC, then that results in empty mutable_parameters.

A VAC having empty parameters doesn't make sense. If there is nothing to change then why would someone specify a vacName in their PVC?

Author: I am going to remove this session in the doc and please refer to the CSI spec.md
